# 6.4.1 Magnetic Susceptibility and Permeability

In paramagnetic and diamagnetic materials, the magnetization is sustained by the field; when B is removed, M disappears. In fact, for most substances the magnetization is proportional to the field, provided the field is not too strong. For notational consistency with the electrical case (Eq. 4.30), I should express the proportionality thus: $$M=\dfrac{1}{\mu_{0}} \chi_{m} B \qquad (\text{incorrect!}) \tag{6.28}$$

But custom dictates that it be written in terms of  $\mathbf{H}$, instead of $\mathbf{B}$: $$\mathbf{M}=\chi_{m} \mathbf{H} . \tag{6.29}$$
The constant of proportionality $\chi_{m}$ is called the <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">magnetic susceptibility</mark> #def/electrodynamics/magnet ; it is a dimensionless quantity that varies from one substance to another – <mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">positive for paramagnets</mark> and <mark style="background: #ADCCFFA6;">negative for diamagnets</mark>. Typical values are around $10^{-5}$ (see Table 6.1).

Materials that obey Eq. 6.29 are called <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">linear media</mark> #def/electrodynamics/magnet . In view of [[Eq. 6.18,]] $$\mathbf{B}=\mu_{0}(\mathbf{H}+\mathbf{M})=\mu_{0}\left(1+\chi_{m}\right) \mathbf{H} \tag{6.30}$$ for linear media. Thus $\mathbf{B}$ also **proportional to** $\mathbf{H}$: $$\mathbf{B}=\mu \mathbf{H}, \tag{6.31}$$ where $$\mu \equiv \mu_{0}\left(1+\chi_{m}\right) . \tag{6.32}$$

The quantity $\mu$ is called the <mark style="background: #FFF3A3A6;">permeability</mark> #def/electrodynamics/magnet  of the material. In a **vacuum**, where there is no matter to magnetize, the **susceptibility $\chi_{m}$ vanishes**, and the **permeability is $\mu_{0}$** . That’s why $\mu_{0}$ is called the **permeability of free space**.

