A smart pointer will **automate the process of creating objects on heap and delete the objects at some condition** . It means that you **use the `new` without using `delete`** . 

# 01 Unique Pointer

`unique_ptr` is a **scope pointer** that **when you get out of the scope, it will automatically use delete** .

## 1.1 Why is unique

**A `unique_ptr` can not be copied !** 

It is because if you copy a `unique_ptr` , then they point to the some address of the memory and **when one is died, it will free that memory, but the other still point to that memory** , which means you point to a memory that is free. That is illegal.

## 1.2 Example

### 1.2.1 Common Method

How to create a `unique_ptr` ?

- `unique_ptr` is declared in the head file `<memory>` 

```C++
#include <iostream>
#include <memory>

class Entity
{
	public :
		Entity ()
		{
			std::cout << "Created Entity !" << std::endl;
		}
		~Entity ()
		{
			std::cout << "Destroyed Entity !" << std::endl;
		}
		void Print ()
		{

		}
	private :
		int x;
};



int main ()
{
	{
		std::unique_ptr <Entity> e (new Entity);
		e->Print ();
	}

	return 0;
}
```

In the line `std::unique_ptr <Entity> e (new Entity);` we use `<>` to **give the pointer a tamplate** , then we use `new` to allocate the memory and create a `unique_ptr` of the instant of class Entity.

But we can't use `std::unique_ptr <Entity> e = new Entity ();` to create the pointer, that is because the **constructor of `unique_ptr` is `explicit`** : 

```C++
explicit
unique_ptr(pointer __p) noexcept
: _M_t(__p)
	{ }
```

It means that **we need to call the constructor explicit** -> [Explicit](../02%20Class/10.%20Implicit%20and%20Explicit.md#10.2%20Explicit) .

### 1.2.2 Better

We'd better create a `unique_ptr` by : 

```C++
std::unique_ptr <Entity> entity = std::make_unique <Entity> ();
entity->Print ();
```

The primary reason is the **exception safety** . If you meet a constructor that raises the exception,  `make_unique` will confirm that **the pointer will not end up having a pointer without any references, thus memory leaks** .

### 1.2.3 Copy

As we have mentioned above, the `unique_ptr` can not be copied. If you write the code below : 

```C++
std::unique_ptr <Entity> e (new Entity);
e->Print ();

std::unique_ptr <Entity> e1 = e;
```

It will lead to an error `call to deleted constructor of ‘std::unique_ptr<Entity>’` . That is because in the definition of `unique_ptr` , the operator = is deleted : 

```C++
unique_ptr& operator=(const unique_ptr&) = delete;
```
# 02 Shared Pointer

The way `shared_ptr` works is by **references counter** . Reference counter is a way to **keep track of how many references you have of that pointer** . **When the counter come to be 0, the pointer is ultimately deleted**. 

## 2.1 How to create `shared_ptr` ?

```C++
#include <iostream>
#include <memory>

class Entity
{
	public :
		Entity ()
		{
			std::cout << "Created Entity !" << std::endl;
		}
		~Entity ()
		{
			std::cout << "Destroyed Entity !" << std::endl;
		}
		void Print ()
		{

		}
	private :
		int x;
};



int main ()
{
	{
		std::shared_ptr <Entity> sharede (new Entity ());
		std::shared_ptr <Entity> sharedEntity = std::make_shared <Entity> ();
	}

	return 0;
}
```

## 2.2 Why to use `make_shared` ?

The reason of uising `make_shared` is different from the `unique_ptr` . It is because that using `make_shared` will have a higher speed.

When you use `std::shared_ptr <Entity> shared (new Entity ());` , you first create an pointer of `Entity` and then you assign that pinter to shared pointer. What's more, a `shared_ptr` will **allocate an additional memory address called *control block* to store the count of the pointer** . 

If you use `new` , the two step will be seperated. But if you use `make_shared` , it will pack two step together, slightly improving the performace. 

## 2.3 Copy

A `shared_ptr` can be copy : 

```C++
int main ()
{
	{ // scope 1
		std::shared_ptr <Entity> e0;
		{ // scope 2
			std::shared_ptr <Entity> e = std::make_shared <Entity> ();
			e0 = e;
		}
	}

	return 0;
}
```

In `scope 1` , we create a shared pointer, and in `scope 2` , we create another shared pointer. Then we assign `e` to `e0` , which means now the count of shared pointer to the instant of `Entity` is two.

When the code step over `std::shared_ptr <Entity> e = std::make_shared <Entity> ();` , the constructor is called and the screen outputs `Created Entity !` . But **when the code run to the end of `scope 2` , the destructor is not called untill the code run to the end of `scope 1` and then the screen outputs `Destroyed Entity !`**  .

# 03 Weak Pointer

**A `weak_ptr` won't raise the count of shared pointer** , which means although you assign a shared pointer to a weak pointer, the count of shared pointer will not be changed. So the **`weak_ptr` does not change the life time of a `shared_ptr`** .

```C++
{ // scope 1
	std::weak_ptr <Entity> e0;
	{ // scope 2
		std::shared_ptr <Entity> e = std::make_shared <Entity> ();
		e0 = e;
	}
}
```

In the code above, **if the code runs to the end of `scope 2` , the pointer `e` will be destroyed** and now **`e0` points to a free memory, which means it has an empty reference** .

# 04 Choice

**Use `unique_ptr` first and if you want to share the object, then use `shared_ptr`** .

`unique_ptr` has a better performace than `shared_ptr` .