# 01 Basic Usage

There is a special data type in C++ : `std::vector` , which is a **dynamic array list** . We can use the `std::vector` to **create a container to store whatever we want to store** :

```C++
#include <iostream>

int main ()
{
    std::vector <int> intergers;
    
    return 0;
}
```

The `std::vector` is in the `<vector>` head file or the `<iostream>` head file. We can **specify the data type stored in the vector by assign the template in** **`<>`** .

Let's see an example :

```C++
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <ostream>

struct Vectex
{
    float x, y, z;
};

std::ostream& operator << (std::ostream& stream, Vectex& vectex)
{
    stream << vectex.x << ", " << vectex.y << ", " << vectex.z;
    return stream;
}

int main ()
{
    std::vector <Vectex> vertices;
    vertices.push_back ({1, 2, 3});
    vertices.push_back ({4, 5, 6});

    // for (int i = 0; i < vertices.size (); i++)
    // {
    //     std::cout << vertices[i] << std::endl;
    // }
    for (Vectex& vertex : vertices)
    {
        std::cout << vertex << std::endl;
    }
    
    return 0;
}
```

We can use `push_back ()` to **push the element to the end of the list** .

```C++
vertices.erase (vertices.begin () + 1);
vertices.clear ();
```

`erase` can remove an element by an **iterator** , `clear` can clear all the elements of the vector.

# 02 Performance Improvement

Let's consider how many times the copy constructor is called :

```C++
#include <iostream>
#include <vector>
#include <ostream>

struct Vertex
{
    float x, y, z;

    Vertex (float x, float y, float z)
    : x (x), y (y), z (z) {}
    Vertex (const Vertex& other)
    : x (other.x), y (other.y), z (other.z)
    {
        std::cout << "Copied !" << std::endl;
    }
};

std::ostream& operator << (std::ostream& stream, Vertex& vectex)
{
    stream << vectex.x << ", " << vectex.y << ", " << vectex.z;
    return stream;
}

int main ()
{
    std::vector <Vertex> vertices;
    vertices.push_back ({1, 2, 3});
    vertices.push_back ({4, 5, 6});

    
    return 0;
}
```

The answer is **3 times** ! Why will the copy constructor be called 3 times ?

What if we add another line `vertices.push_back ({7, 8, 9})` ? It will call the copy constructor 6 times.

If we debug the code, we will find that, when the code runs over `vertices.push_back ({1, 2, 3})` , it will call the copy constructor once, and when the code runs over `vertices.push_back ({4, 5, 6})`, it will call the copy constructor twice. Why ?

## 2.1 How does the vector expand its length ?

The answer to how many times the copy constructor is called is associated with the principle of how the vector expands its length.

Actually, the dynamic array list is a **fake dynamic array list** . It is said that the array list is **always static with a confirmed length** , but the `std::vector` class provides a special method to deal with the expansion. **Actually, whenever you call** **`push_back`** **method, the program will create a new array with the length of** **`original_len + 1`** **somewhere in the memory, and then copy all the elements in the old array into new array and set the last element to what we have pushed** . After doing so, the program will delete the old array, free the memory and then assign the new array to the variable.

So that if we push back a `Vertex` element into the vector, the program will **create a new array and copy the old array to new array**, also the pushed element. This is why the copy constructor is called so many times : When the code runs over `vertices.push_back ({1, 2, 3})` , the program **first creates an instant of** **`Vertex`** **`{1, 2, 3}`** **and creates a new array with length of 1, then copies the instant to the first element of new array** . When the code runs over `vertices.push_back ({4, 5, 6})` , the program **first creates an instant of** **`Vertex`** **`{4, 5, 6}`** **and creates a new array with length of 2, then copies the old element in the old array** **`{1, 2, 3}`** **to the first element of new array and copies** **`{4, 5, 6}`** **to the second element of new array** .

## 2.2 Strategies

Since we have known the reason why the copy constructor is called so many times, there is an improvement strategy which is to decline the times we call the constructor and the copy constructor.

With the analysis above, we can know that the variable `vertices` has reallocated the memory twice from `1` to `2` and finally `3` . So another strategy to improve performance is to decline the times the `vertices` reallocate the memory.

### 2.2.1 `reserve`

We can use `reserve` to pre-allocate the memory, so that when we push our element into the array, it won't create a new one and perform the copy. Instead, it just creates the element we need and copies it into the vector :

```C++
int main ()
{
    std::vector <Vertex> vertices;
    vertices.reserve (3);
    vertices.push_back ({1, 2, 3});
    vertices.push_back ({4, 5, 6});
    vertices.push_back ({7, 8, 9});

    return 0;
}
```

This time, the answer to how many times the copy constructor is called will be 3.

> [!attention]
> 
> `intergers.reserve (3);` is totally different from `std::vector <int> intergers (3);`
> 
> >
> 
> The former one will **reserve enough memory blocks** for the vector but **do not initialize the vector** . While the latter one will **initialize the vector element to be the defaults element** **`0`** .

### 2.2.2 `emplace_back`

We can use another method `emplace_back` to add the element into the array :

```C++
int main ()
{
    std::vector <Vertex> vertices;
    vertices.reserve (3);
    // vertices.push_back ({1, 2, 3});
    // vertices.push_back ({4, 5, 6});
    // vertices.push_back ({7, 8, 9));
    vertices.emplace_back (1, 2, 3);
    vertices.emplace_back (4, 5, 6);
    vertices.emplace_back (7, 8, 9);

    std::cout << vertices.size () << std::endl;

    return 0;
}
```

This time, we **call no copy constructor** and **don't reallocate the memory** anyway. This will definitely improve performance.

**But why the** **`push_back`** **calls the copy constructor while** **`emplace_back`** **not ?**

It is easy to find the answer if we dive into the definition of `push_back` and `emplace_back` . The definition of `push_back` is :

```C++
void
push_back(value_type&& __x)
{ emplace_back(std::move(__x)); }
```

The `push_back` exactly calls the `emplace_back` method and since `push_back` needs a parameter to pass to `emplace_back` , the program will first create an instant of `Vertex` and pass it to `push_back` and then copy it to the vector. While we can simply call `emplace_back` and just **pass the fields of the** **`Vertex`** **to construct the in the array directly** .